First of all, I wanted to say good night to
my colleague Marina and to Don Jesús García
Pérez, pediatrician specialist, how are you?
Thank you very much. First of all,
for the effort of having come here.
I know that new technologies
sometimes complicate things a bit because they
make it very difficult. How are you? Jesus.
Well, very well, at the moment, here on
standby. So, well, well, the wait,
Jesus. I wanted to start with a
question that is a little more basic, not related to
this matter that has been making so many headlines
in recent hours regarding the
Anabel Pantoja case and the investigation she is
facing for alleged abuse.
When a baby comes to a
pediatric consultation, this has to happen not
only because of your own demonstration, by the
pediatrician himself, for a personal reason because
he feels it necessary to act this way, but also
because of the standards that a pediatrician has to follow
in order for an
investigation of this caliber to be opened. Okay, very
good, the question. Look, when we observe,
we do an examination of any child,
especially if they are babies, an
exhaustive examination. We do one, we talk to the
parents, we talk to see what their
birth history was like, etc., etc.,
and according to what we do, we see that history, we do
what we call the examination.  physical
of the child no then we do all kinds
of exploration And then according to that
exploration we do an initial guideline and
we consider what we call a
clinical judgment no then in that exploration we
begin to see some symptoms
that do not seem ordinary to us but
ex ordinary that there are very
heterogeneous signs exactly to call them
So they are not the classic ones not of a
healthy and normal child and we do a
very exhaustive assessment no And if we have
a reasonable doubt we put a
kind of observation in the report and we
always make a report but never
that it is dogmatic dogmatic means
that it is real and that we always never put a
diagnosis but we put a clinical judgment
it is a hypothesis then in that
situation we put presumed always
presumed child at social risk no the
word abuse let's say sounds a little
derogatory but social risk implies
many things no and then we write that
down and we describe the reason no in
the face of an incongruous history a series
of symptoms that are not precise or
adequate And then what we do is
a notification to the judge and the prosecutor to the
juvenile prosecutor because logically it is
that the one who accelerates the procedures a little
not the judge And then  In this situation,
with this clinical judgment,
other professionals intervene jointly, such as
forensic psychologists and
forensic doctors. So in this
situation, with respect to the parents and
respect for paternity and maternity, we
obviously see that when there is a
reasonable doubt, the professional has the
obligation to notify it. Why? Because
if he doesn't do it and the child really
has it and it is proven, we fall into what is
called negligence due to omission of duty and
that is punishable, which is why we are not
judges, we are simply
objective eyewitnesses of a boy or
a girl in a situation of doubt
before this clinical picture that we
have observed, that is why it is not our
attitude to demonize the parents or
but to protect the minor, then of course
that is what makes us suspect that there has
been or in this case I don't know, but
because it is not known because of course the
Supreme Court has said that it should not be, let's
say, disseminate what has been
diagnosed or seen, not
within the complementary tests
that there are in the Canary Islands, they have done it in
that hospital, no, that is why let's say that if
the question is obvious, have they made that
type of notifications  It's because
there's something suspicious on the one hand in the
statements of the
custodial parents and on the other hand in the
objective examinations that they've seen in
the minor. No look eh Eh Jesus two things
first of all to be clear as to
when something suspicious or some type
of abnormal injury is seen in this examination
that you were talking about the first thing
that is done by the protocol that is
clear and precise is to make it known to
the authorities to inform the
authorities that is the first thing that is
done of course in all cases
regardless of what matters
is the best interest of the minor I
mean the important thing is not who
the parents are or what
the parents represent in society but the child in
other words their rights may be altered
and we have to respect that fundamental principle
and also the
health risk that that child may have in the face of those
more or less objective signs that
the professionals have seen and the
second thing I wanted to tell you is that there is
a lot of talk No already in
general terms before going into details or
particularizing in this case it is about the
famous shaken baby syndrome there
are not many doubts and there are many
people Well  that you don't know among them I
didn't know exactly specifically
apart from I don't have children and because I don't have to
know eh all the
terminology of this type what it
is exactly and that it is also one of
the causes of injuries in many babies
no that you will have seen well that you
will have seen that more than that they don't treat
you formally during all these years on
many occasions yes yes no obviously
we have seen cases and I'm going to tell you a
figure in Spain there is an average of 100
children who have suffered from
shaken baby syndrome or in other words shaking is the
movement the citation that a
child makes and this often occurs because of
a vital situation of the child or
because it is excessive or because they are hungry or they are in
pain or it has such a way that
as a consequence they are
nervously altered Then they
welcome the child with the intention of knowing what is
happening to them and then they shake and
move the child in such a way that they
shake their head back
and forth taking into account
that the neck muscles No no no
are not yet sufficiently developed to
hold back possible sudden movements of
the neck  And then the brain
inside the skull moves from one side
to the other and the blood vessels in the
brain can break, which can
cause what we call
cerebral hemorrhages, subdural hemorrhages, and
sometimes also retinal hemorrhages, and
even produce what is also
called cerebral edema, not
water inside the brain, which
can occur and can have
important consequences. These
consequences can be very varied, even
to the point of death, causing a delay, it can
cause a lot of things, of course, and if
the child is supervised, it can cause many
situations, important neurological problems,
in short, the problem is
quite quite important. No, then of
course, seizures as well, and the child
begins to turn a different
color, like bluish, and sometimes
hemorrhages in the eyes, that is,
what I was saying before, retinal hemorrhages that
can occur as a consequence of
this, it seems like a very everyday act,
that you pick up the child and maybe such.
But it can bring, you have to be very
careful because it can have
really serious consequences, for
life, we have to avoid it, and that is what
we say. It is that I understand that
nobody is born a father or a mother  being a
father or a mother does not depend on
fertilization being a father or a mother depends on
education I mean no, let's not consider
that you have to have like an education to
be a mother or a father no because
anyone can have a sabbatical night and
pregnancy appears then but that's not what
being a father is no and if the child cries and so
on and even if they are not mature the
logical thing is to generate empathy with
the child say pick him up dance talk to him
the Lambada if necessary continually
sing to him talk to him Jesus I understand that
parents eh should know the risks not of
this syndrome and and they should
learn I suppose to manage or to use
certain techniques and to and to and to manage
stress a little no and the frustration
that at certain times you can
have No yes No man Of course of course many
times they ask you questions like look the
child cries a lot we don't know if it's because of
hunger or thirst or or what I just said
no Or that it has well very typical
from 15 or 20 days of life children
During the first three or four months they
have what we call
infantile colic no that well it bores the
devil  and to God and his mother no as
we say why Because
logically a young couple who are
working and suddenly the child starts crying at
6 in the afternoon
quiet mole and it turns out that he is like that until
4 or 5 in the morning just when
the parents have to get up to go to
work and the child at that time falls asleep
eats chestnut And that generates that as I
said at the beginning frustration let's say
irritability this type of problems that
parents are often not able to
solve it is spoken in general of
course a question completely
from ignorance maybe you are
going to tell me that it is too obvious no
but when the injuries are examined I
understand that Professionals know how to
differentiate with a lot or little margin of
error because of course when we talk about this
syndrome well we are talking maybe about
a more abrupt movement of
something that is exceeded it is possible to
differentiate between an abuse on purpose or
involuntary in those injuries in those
wounds that are seen man if the mistreatment
is not I mean the child shaken sometimes does
not have injuries that we see not because they are
injuries of are  deferred does not appear
at the first moment, unless there is
physical abuse, obviously not.
Then that does make one suspicious
because logically if there are bruises in
certain parts of the body and so on,
that is logically evident, not another of
the things that we often have to
differentiate because sometimes it tells you, it is not that
the child fell, it is not good, he can
actually fall. And if the child is
fine, he falls asleep. Well, maybe he
has nothing but we will have to
observe this child on a
continuous basis because in a deferred manner
if he fell and hit his head
on the ground, he may have. Well, a
subdural hematoma, that is, neurologically,
I mean the brain. So that is what we have to
avoid, but yes, we
clearly detect when there is a hematoma due to
physical abuse because there are bruises that when
falling, we can know how he fell and
but if they appear in other places that are not the
appropriate ones, we suspect that there is
something wrong. It is evident and it is
related to the fall, not for that reason. Of
course we can have differences, they are
different, perhaps the
injuries and the places and the forms of
the internal injuries are different
than if it is
an accident that if it is Of course of course because many times as I said before in the shaking the injuries do not appear many times the most obvious ones are what I have told you no and I wanted to ask you more specifically if you want to express it more specifically on the subject of Anabel
Pantoja your opinion as a pediatrician although
you have obviously not examined
that baby or handled the case What is your opinion
from outside and with the
knowledge that you have of
that situation how does that look because there I have to
agree with my colleagues
a reasonable doubt eh I mean I don't know what
happens for the good of the minor Well the
child is is with the parents no I think we would have to
see how that
evolution is and we would have to try to do a
more exhaustive follow-up no So
because Of course with all my respect to
the couple eh I always have and respect
and defend the rights of the minor and as I
said before forgive me for being
repetitive I mean it is the
best interest of the child No but well the
parents have to be responsible that
even if their type of
exhaustive explorations have been done and that there is
a reasonable doubt does not mean  that
this is directly imputed to them but
they have to understand that for the good of the
child it has to be done and that any
professional let's say responsible for what they have
done is correct, I mean I feel sorry
for them but it has to be this way
we are not imputing them nor am I blaming them
no because of course No I have not seen the
boy or the girl in this case no but I do
have that I am not speaking in a
way let's say defend my
professionals No not at all I am not
defending the child fundamentally no
because of course an exploration normally
when I see a newborn I speak with
the parents I have a very
good interrelationship with always with the parents and let's
say well I observe I speak I listen
fundamentally I listen and then
Well I see that there is nothing well there is
nothing Well now if I see
minimal the first thing I tell them is the
parents I say Look I have a reasonable doubt
this does not seem very clear to me very correct it
is what one expresses it is not the same as
the other no because of course sometimes it has
happened you have it happened that you have to have to
open a report
yes yes a lot many times and in mind that
I already have the snowy peaks are
many years of practice So it is It is
evident So also keep in mind
that the only social pediatrics unit
in Madrid is the one I founded
25 years ago, so I mean
and there are these types of children that are
referred to us, I have gone as an expert as a witness
to the trials because of course I have
notified
a lot No then Of course, that's why I
say that when faced with that doubt, I see if there is a
certain incongruity between one and the other and
normally when there is nothing
perfectly they speak perfectly we do
without any type of problem and we also have to
realize in case they lie to
us, there is no need to have a
certain skill to ask the same
questions changed, let's say,
context we put the subject in the
predicate and the predicate in the
complement then logically it is
a way of knowing a little bit
Where it is When we have that doubt, eh,
we do that type of intervention No,
but under normal conditions 95%
of couples are wonderful Yes, but
eh, they usually make few mistakes
Professionals don't I mean, when they have a
reasonable doubt it usually ends well or
ends badly Hey look, these
people  They contradict each other because they don't
agree but in the end nothing happened
Yes yes it is possible it is also possible
agreement why because because many times
eh without wanting to they themselves try to
protect the men embellish it exactly and we
understand that man how could we not
understand it So in principle We
always try to understand the parents
because we put myself I say a good
professional what you do is put yourself
empathize not with the people no I mean
in this case it's not because you are a doctor
but if everyone empathized
let's say with everyone there wouldn't be all
this disaster eh that we have
currently no because of course and
Today there is another thing too that I also want to tell you Look information bulimia generates anorexia of knowledge get it well in your head sometimes so much information generates ignorance I mean Be careful with the exhaustive information that there is eh I say in general not only in medicine and
this is what is happening there is not so much
heterogeneity of news you get news
that if they have had convulsions
that they have had a cerebral hemorrhage
hell listen but nobody can
know that because it is prohibited that
No, the diagnosis is not
known. Yes, today some things are leaked, they
are erroneous and others are not. What we do
know is that they have also declared,
as you have said before, because they have
declared separately. As far as
we know, the statements do not
entirely match. What we also
know is that the little girl is
being monitored by
health professionals, of course, to see
her progress. It is logical in these
cases. I suppose. Of course, of course, yes, of
course, that is so because the fact that she has been
discharged does not mean that she is
out of danger of after-effects. No, Don
Jesús, no, she is not discharged, but she will be
under observation, let's say. I mean, I imagine
that if she is discharged, it is that, I don't know
what situation of the legal process she is in, but
because I believe that at the moment. As long as there is
no, let's say, confirmation of all
the studies that have been done, I believe that
the judiciary has preferred, let's say, to
always maintain the parents so that they take it away from her, there
has to be a danger, a
manifestation of danger, but I am referring
to the medical situation, I mean, I imagine that
when they discharge her, at least
regarding after-effects, she is out of danger. No,
at the moment, there is no danger at the moment.  That's why I
say but do a
follow-up because of course to say that they
appear there may be if there has been what
we have discussed deferred injuries
that maybe well this has to
continue doing it no I think that
any professional would do that
every 10 weeks or 10 days we will have to
see observing the evolution
of the baby not them the protagonists the
parents what they are transmitting to us
through social networks but of course they are that
the girl is happy that she is with
them that she is delighted but of course we do not
know to what extent that is what
they transmit but they have not
transmitted the truth to us from the beginning
I hope so I hope because it is the most important thing
here of course No yes that is what we
all wish that above all for the
baby totally totally I understand
we are talking about about 18 days that they spend in the
hospital with the girl admitted I understand
Don Jesús that those 18 days they take
into account also what they observe in the
parents during intensive care
which is no small thing but the contact of
the doctors with the parents the
conversations they are having with
them those 18 days I understand that will be taken
into account when it comes to
send the statement to the court no of
course man Of course yes of course
yes Even the first center where she
was because before they were in another
medical center that was not public Yes yes they
were I think it was a
private hospital yes yes yes and then it seems
that they saw her there no they didn't see
anything the girl got worse apparently and
then either she got worse or they took him to the
emergency room at the hospital and that was when
after the
physical and complementary examinations
they decided to admit him to the ubi no That is why I
say that any child who has
a normal examination and so on is not
admitted to the ubi, that is to say when there is
that type of decision it is that they have
seen something The professionals I repeat again, in other words, there is
no need to go around in circles, in other words, they
had to see some symptomatology that
offered doubts for the health and
well-being of the minor in this case no
[Music]